In Java, an array is an object one can create to hold a predefined set of elements of any one type of variable. Its purpose is to be a place to store variables, in which a programmer can reference from it. 
In comparison, trying to handle a potentially large set of variables (think navigating single words in an entire online book) without such allocation could result in anywhere from confusion when programming, to having to locate issues that come from a single variable when thousands could be at play.

A version of this is an array list. Practically the same concept, but can change its size to accommodate a set of data that may be too large to be predicted. Such a difference means that a list is much easier for a programmer to work with, in that they only have to worry about what elements to add, remove, change, or find the position at.

This leads into the different cases where one may want to use one or the other. 
The main downside of an array object is that it must be a preset size, so if one needs to add an extra element and every slot is taken up, one must create an entirely new array to copy the original, then modify to accommodate new needs. Not only does this lead to more code filling up a screen and having to create a counter variable to keep track of what spaces are used, but can be less efficient in terms of computing cost, as memory is allocated to creating arrays that are then unused. 
Lists combat this by potentially reducing a significant volume of coding text. For example, in a case where one has to create a new array to have more space for variables, with a list one can simply just add a new variable. They do have their disadvantages though, in that with smaller or predetermined data sets they can require more computer memory than just using an array. 
Arrays also give the ability to track data in multiple dimensions, like navigating row and column data sets that become extremely important in cases such as programming the pixels on the computer screen you’re reading this from, or three-dimensional graphics in movies and video games. As one may see, both types of objects have their time and place when it comes to programming.
